Lily Xu is a second-year PhD student at Harvard University, advised by Prof. Milind Tambe. Her research focuses on applications of artificial intelligence — specifically in online learning and game theory — to wildlife conservation. Lily graduated from Dartmouth College in 2018, where she studied computer science and Spanish.

Lily Xu is a PhD student studying computer science at Harvard University, advised by Prof. Milind Tambe. Her research applies online learning and game theory to wildlife conservation. She has focused on the prevention of illegal wildlife poaching; her work on predictive models to prevent poaching is being deployed to 800 protected areas around the world on the SMART conservation software. She is passionate about reducing her negative impact on the environment and increasing her positive impact on society.


Lily Xu is a PhD student studying computer science at Harvard University, advised by Prof. Milind Tambe. Her research applies online learning and game theory to wildlife conservation. She has focused on the prevention of illegal wildlife poaching; her work on predictive models to prevent poaching is being deployed to 800 protected areas around the world on the SMART conservation software, in partnership with organizations including the World Wide Fund for Nature and Microsoft AI for Earth.

Lily Xu is a PhD student studying computer science at Harvard University, advised by Prof. Milind Tambe. Her research applies machine learning and game theory to wildlife conservation. She has focused on the prevention of illegal wildlife poaching; her work on predictive models to prevent poaching is being deployed to 1,000 protected areas around the world on the SMART conservation software, in collaboration with the SMART partnership and Microsoft AI for Earth.

Lily Xu is a PhD student focusing on AI, specifically machine learning and game theory, for environmental conservation. She has focused on the prevention of illegal wildlife poaching; her work on predictive models to prevent poaching has been deployed in Cambodia and is now being scaled to 1,000 protected areas around the world on the SMART conservation software.

Lily Xu is a PhD student at Harvard University developing AI techniques, specifically in machine learning and game theory, for environmental conservation. Her research focuses on the prevention of illegal wildlife poaching; her work on predictive models to prevent poaching has been deployed in Cambodia and is now being scaled to 1,000 protected areas around the world on the SMART conservation software. 

Lily Xu is a PhD student at Harvard University developing AI techniques, specifically in machine learning and game theory, for environmental conservation. Her research focuses on the prevention of illegal wildlife poaching: this work has been deployed in Cambodia and is now being scaled to 1,000 protected areas around the world on the SMART conservation software. Her work has been recognized with best paper runner-up at AAAI and the INFORMS Doing Good with Good OR award. 


In collaboration with conservation NGOs, our project helps plan effective ranger patrols to protect endangered animals from poaching. Algorithmically, the problem is to optimize limited resources to maximize the number of snares confiscated. Given limited and incomplete data, we leverage linear programming, multi-armed bandits, and game theory to handle uncertainty about poacher behavior. Our approaches are supported with theorems, experiments, and real-world field tests. Our system is being integrated into existing conservation software to become available to 800 protected areas worldwide


---------

Analytics for a Better World, Sept 2022

Wildlife poaching fuels the multi-billion dollar illegal wildlife trade and pushes countless species to the brink of extinction. To aid rangers in preventing poaching in protected areas around the world, we have developed PAWS, the Protection Assistant for Wildlife Security. We present technical advances in multi-armed bandits and robust sequential decision-making using reinforcement learning, with research questions that emerged from on-the-ground challenges. We also discuss bridging the gap between research and practice, presenting results from field tests in Cambodia and large-scale deployment through integration with SMART, the leading software system for protected area management used by over 1,000 wildlife parks worldwide.

——————————

[Pasteur's Quadrant seminar Feb 2022]

Bio: Lily Xu is a PhD student at Harvard University developing AI techniques, specifically in machine learning and game theory, for environmental conservation. Her primary application area has been the prevention of illegal wildlife poaching. Her work has been recognized with best paper runner-up at AAAI and the INFORMS Doing Good with Good OR award.

Abstract: Wildlife poaching fuels the multi-billion dollar illegal wildlife trade and pushes countless species to the brink of extinction. To aid rangers in preventing poaching in protected areas around the world, we have developed PAWS, the Protection Assistant for Wildlife Security. We present technical advances in multi-armed bandits and robust sequential decision-making using reinforcement learning, with research questions that emerged from on-the-ground challenges. We also discuss bridging the gap between research and practice, presenting results from field deployment in Cambodia and large-scale deployment through integration with SMART, the leading software system for protected area management used by over 1,000 wildlife parks worldwide. 

PAWS has been developed in close collaboration with conservation organizations including the World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) and Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS). 


-----------------


To prevent poaching, rangers conduct patrols around these protected areas to detect and confiscate snares. Unfortunately, poachers have the upper hand; wire snares are extremely cheap to make and easy to carry, so poachers can easily blanket the ground with snares

Profit-driven poachers will enter protected areas and place snares to entrap animals. 

Our project is called PAWS, the Protection Assistant for Wildlife Security, which has been created in close partnership with a number of conservation organizations, including the World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) and Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS)

Although SMART records significant amounts of historical data, its current capabilities are limited to managing data; the missing link is to leverage that data to inform patrol strategy

In collaboration with conservation NGOs, our project helps plan effective ranger patrols to protect endangered animals from poaching. Algorithmically, the problem is to optimize limited resources to maximize the number of snares confiscated. Given limited and incomplete data, we leverage linear programming, multi-armed bandits, and game theory to handle uncertainty about poacher behavior. Our approaches are supported with theorems, experiments, and real-world field tests. Our system is being integrated into existing conservation software to become available to 1,000 protected areas worldwide.


-----------------


Title: Learning and Planning Under Uncertainty for Wildlife Conservation

Abstract: Wildlife poaching fuels the multi-billion dollar illegal wildlife trade and pushes countless species to the brink of extinction. To aid rangers in preventing poaching in protected areas around the world, we have developed PAWS, the Protection Assistant for Wildlife Security. We present technical advances in multi-armed bandits and robust sequential decision-making using reinforcement learning, with research questions that emerged from on-the-ground challenges. We also discuss bridging the gap between research and practice, presenting results from field deployment in Cambodia and large-scale deployment through integration with SMART, the leading software system for protected area management used by over 1,000 wildlife parks worldwide.

Bio: Lily Xu is a PhD student at Harvard working with Prof. Milind Tambe to develop AI techniques, specifically in machine learning and game theory, for environmental conservation. Her primary application area has been wildlife conservation through preventing illegal wildlife poaching. Her work has been recognized with best paper runner-up at AAAI and the INFORMS Doing Good with Good OR award.




Lily Xu is a PhD student at Harvard working with Prof. Milind Tambe to develop AI techniques, specifically in machine learning and game theory, for environmental conservation. Her primary application area is wildlife conservation through preventing illegal wildlife poaching; her work building the PAWS system to predict poaching hotspots has been deployed in Cambodia and is being scaled globally through integration with SMART conservation software. Lily also co-organizes the Mechanism Design for Social Good (MD4SG) research initiative. 

Lily Xu is a PhD student at Harvard developing AI techniques to address environmental challenges. She has focused on advancing methods in machine learning and game theory for wildlife conservation through preventing illegal wildlife poaching. Her work building the PAWS system to predict poaching hotspots has been deployed in Cambodia and is being scaled globally to 1,000 protected areas through integration with SMART conservation software. Lily co-organizes the Mechanism Design for Social Good (MD4SG) research initiative, and her research has been recognized with best paper runner-up at AAAI, the INFORMS Doing Good with Good OR award, and a Google PhD Fellowship.



—————————
Title: Learning and Planning Under Uncertainty for Wildlife Conservation

Abstract: Wildlife poaching fuels the multi-billion dollar illegal wildlife trade and pushes countless species to the brink of extinction. To aid rangers in preventing poaching in protected areas around the world, we have developed PAWS, the Protection Assistant for Wildlife Security. We present technical advances in multi-armed bandits and robust sequential decision-making using reinforcement learning, with research questions that emerged from on-the-ground challenges. We also discuss bridging the gap between research and practice, presenting results from field deployment in Cambodia and large-scale deployment through integration with SMART, the leading software system for protected area management used by over 1,000 wildlife parks worldwide.

Bio: Lily Xu is a PhD student at Harvard developing AI techniques to address environmental planning challenges. She has focused on advancing methods in machine learning and game theory for wildlife conservation through preventing wildlife poaching. Lily co-organizes the Mechanism Design for Social Good (MD4SG) research initiative, and her research has been recognized with best paper runner-up at AAAI, the INFORMS Doing Good with Good OR award, and a Google PhD Fellowship.


——————————

[want to justify that biodiversity is URGENT and CRITICAL]

Ceballos et al. Science Advances 2015. Accelerated modern human–induced species losses: Entering the sixth mass extinction https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/sciadv.1400253

Bondi*, Xu*, Acosta-Navas, Killian. AIES 2021. Envisioning Communities: A Participatory Approach Towards AI for Social Good https://arxiv.org/pdf/2105.01774.pdf


https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/sciadv.1400253

(optional readings) 
AI empowers conservation biology https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-019-00746-1


[poaching impacts] Hauenstein et al. 2019. Nature Communications. African elephant poaching rates correlate with local poverty, national corruption and global ivory price https://www.nature.com/articles/s41467-019-09993-2



[participatory design] Kuiper et al. 2020. Biological Conservation. Rangers and modellers collaborate to build and evaluate spatial models of African elephant poaching https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0006320719319512



[on my work on AI for poaching prevention] Xu et al. 2020. ICDE. Stay Ahead of Poachers: Illegal Wildlife Poaching Prediction and Patrol Planning Under Uncertainty with Field Test Evaluations  https://arxiv.org/pdf/1903.06669.pdf




------------------

Talk title: Conserving the Most Vulnerable Wildlife: Ranked Prioritization of Groups with Combinatorial Bandits

Abstract: Wildlife poaching fuels the multi-billion dollar illegal wildlife trade and pushes countless species to the brink of extinction. To aid rangers in preventing poaching in protected areas around the world, we develop an multi-armed bandit approach to help rangers choose how much time to spend in each region, balancing exploration of infrequently visited regions and exploitation of known hotspots. However, naive bandit approaches compromise short-term performance for long-term optimality, resulting in animals poached. To speed up performance, we leverage smoothness in the reward function and decomposability of actions. Additionally, when some species are more vulnerable, we ought to offer more protection to these animals; unfortunately, existing bandit approaches do not offer a way to prioritize important species. To bridge this gap, we propose a novel combinatorial bandit objective that trades off between reward maximization and species prioritization. We demonstrate that our approach improves performance on real-world poaching data from Cambodia.

Bio: Lily Xu is a PhD student at Harvard developing AI techniques to address environmental planning challenges. She has focused on advancing methods in machine learning and game theory for wildlife conservation through preventing wildlife poaching. Lily co-organizes the Mechanism Design for Social Good (MD4SG) research initiative, and her research has been recognized with best paper runner-up at AAAI, the INFORMS Doing Good with Good OR award, and a Google PhD Fellowship.

------------------

[March 2023 Berkeley MARL / Brown algorithmic game theory]

Talk title: Minimax Regret Optimization: Robust Planning for Conservation and Maternal Health

Abstract: Sequential decision-making algorithms, including reinforcement learning, have been applied to a wide variety of settings including planning ranger patrols for wildlife conservation and scheduling interventions for maternal healthcare. Unfortunately, in these real-world settings, we rarely have a perfect simulator of the environment, which is necessary for planning. Thus, we consider robust planning by formulating the problem as a game between the planner and an adversarial nature, who sets worst-case instantiations of environment parameters, to optimize for minimax regret for the planner. We present theoretical convergence results as well as concrete applications to deployed research, using reinforcement learning for wildlife conservation in Cambodia and restless bandits for maternal healthcare in India. 

Bio: Lily Xu is a PhD student at Harvard developing AI techniques to address environmental planning challenges. She has focused on advancing methods in online learning and reinforcement learning for wildlife conservation through preventing wildlife poaching. Lily co-organizes the Mechanism Design for Social Good (MD4SG) research initiative, and her research has been recognized with best paper runner-up at AAAI, the INFORMS Doing Good with Good OR award, and a Google PhD Fellowship.


—————————————————————

INFORMS Healthcare (July 2023) 

Title: Online Learning and Robust Planning: Restless Bandits for Maternal Health Interventions


Online Learning for Restless Bandits: Scheduling Interventions for Maternal Health

Restless multi-armed bandits (RMABs) extend multi-armed bandits to allow for stateful arms, where the state of each arm evolves restlessly depending on whether that arm is pulled. RMABs have been applied to critical sequential decision-making problems including scheduling health interventions. However, solving RMABs requires knowing transition dynamics, which are often unknown upfront, particularly in healthcare applications. Here, we propose the first online learning algorithm based on the Whittle index policy, using an upper confidence bound (UCB) approach. Specifically, we estimate confidence bounds of the unknown transition probabilities and formulate a bilinear program to compute optimistic Whittle indices. Our algorithm, UCWhittle, achieves sublinear O(H √ T log T) frequentist regret in T episodes with a constant horizon H. Empirically, we demonstrate that UCWhittle achieves improved performance on a real maternal and childcare dataset from an NGO in India.



——————

WWF Fuller Seminar - April 2023


Lily Xu is a computer science PhD student at Harvard developing AI techniques to address environmental challenges. She focuses on advancing methods in machine learning, sequential decision-making, and game theory for biodiversity conservation through preventing illegal wildlife poaching. Her work building the PAWS system to predict poaching hotspots has been deployed in Cambodia and is being scaled globally to 1,000 protected areas through integration with SMART conservation software. Lily co-organizes the Mechanism Design for Social Good (MD4SG) research initiative and serves as AI Lead for the SMART Partnership. Her research has been recognized with best paper runner-up at AAAI, the INFORMS Doing Good with Good OR award, and a Google PhD Fellowship. She is passionate about building bridges between the conservation and computation communities, and has done so through organizing related workshops, working groups, and events.


—————


MSR NE - ML Ideas - June 2023

Title: Learning and Planning Under Uncertainty for Conservation

Abstract: Wildlife poaching pushes countless species to the brink of extinction, with animal population sizes declining by an average of 70% since 1970. To aid rangers in preventing poaching in protected areas around the world, we have developed the Protection Assistant for Wildlife Security (PAWS). We present technical advances in multi-armed bandits, robust reinforcement learning, and causal inference, guided by research questions that emerged from on-the-ground challenges in deploying PAWS. We also discuss bridging the gap between research and practice, from field tests in Cambodia to large-scale deployment through integration with SMART, the leading software system for protected area management used by over 1,000 wildlife parks worldwide.
 
Bio: Lily Xu is a computer science PhD student at Harvard developing AI techniques to address environmental challenges. She focuses on advancing methods in machine learning, sequential decision-making, and game theory for biodiversity conservation through preventing wildlife poaching. Her work building the PAWS system to predict poaching hotspots has been deployed in Cambodia and is being scaled globally through integration with SMART conservation software. Lily co-organizes the Mechanism Design for Social Good (MD4SG) research initiative and serves as AI Lead for the SMART Partnership. Her research has been recognized with best paper runner-up at AAAI, the INFORMS Doing Good with Good OR award, and a Google PhD Fellowship. 

————

EECS Rising Stars application

Lily Xu is a computer science PhD student at Harvard advised by Milind Tambe (PhD expected May 2024). In her research, she develops and deploys AI techniques to enable reliable decision-making in high-stakes settings. Specifically, she advances methods in machine learning, sequential decision-making, and game theory for biodiversity conservation through preventing wildlife poaching. Her work building the PAWS system to predict poaching hotspots has been deployed in Cambodia and is being scaled globally through integration with SMART conservation software. Lily co-organizes the Mechanism Design for Social Good (MD4SG) research initiative and serves as AI Lead for the SMART Partnership. Her research has been recognized with best paper runner-up at AAAI, the INFORMS Doing Good with Good OR award, and a Google PhD Fellowship.

————

EAAMO DC

Title: High-stakes decisions with low-quality data: Learning and planning under uncertainty

Abstract: My research advances AI methods to enable effective decision-making in resource-scarce settings where messy data is a ubiquitous limitation. Here, I demonstrate how immersion in the science and practice of environmental conservation—working in close partnership with stakeholders—unearths research questions guided by on-the-ground challenges. I present technical advances across multi-armed bandits, reinforcement learning, and causal inference to guide environmental decisions. Equally importantly, I discuss bridging the gap between research and practice, from field tests in Cambodia to large-scale deployment through integration with SMART, the leading software system for protected area management used by over 1,200 wildlife parks worldwide.


[WILDLABS short bio]
PhD student in computer science at Harvard, focused on AI for patrol planning, protected area management, and impact evaluation. Also AI lead for the SMART Partnership


———————

Title: High-stakes decisions with low-quality data: Learning and planning under uncertainty for conservation

Abstract: Wildlife poaching pushes countless species to the brink of extinction, with animal population sizes declining by an average of 70% since 1970. To aid rangers in preventing poaching in protected areas around the world, we have developed the Protection Assistant for Wildlife Security (PAWS). We present technical advances in multi-armed bandits, robust reinforcement learning, and causal inference, guided by research questions that emerged from on-the-ground challenges in deploying PAWS. We also discuss bridging the gap between research and practice, from field tests in Uganda and Cambodia to large-scale deployment through integration with SMART, the leading software system for protected area management used by over 1,000 wildlife parks worldwide.


Bio: Lily Xu is a computer science PhD student at Harvard developing AI techniques to address environmental planning challenges. She focuses on advancing methods in machine learning, sequential decision-making, and game theory for biodiversity conservation through preventing wildlife poaching. Her work building the PAWS system to predict poaching hotspots has been deployed in Cambodia and is being scaled globally through integration with SMART conservation software. Lily co-organizes the Mechanism Design for Social Good (MD4SG) research initiative and serves as AI Lead for the SMART Partnership. Her research has been recognized with best paper runner-up at AAAI, the INFORMS Doing Good with Good OR award, and a Google PhD Fellowship.



————



(note Bryan's bio:  Bryan Wilder is a fifth-year PhD student in Computer Science at Harvard University, where he is advised by Milind Tambe. His research focuses on the intersection of optimization and machine learning, with the goal of improving interventions that serve vulnerable populations. His work has received or been nominated for best paper awards at ICML and AAMAS, and was a finalist for the INFORMS Doing Good with Good OR competition. He is supported by a NSF Graduate Research Fellowship.)


Bailey research summary: I do computer science research motivated by the goal of making democratic processes more efficacious and more equitable. On the technical side, I enjoy working with theoretical models and tools from social choice, learning theory, and algorithms. The problems I choose are practice-driven, and I aim for my work to be informed by practice and research from other disciplines. 

———————


Presentation title: Designing Algorithms for Social Good

Algorithmic and artificial intelligence techniques show immense potential to deepen our understanding of socioeconomic inequality and inform interventions designed to improve access to opportunity. Interventions aimed at historically under-served communities are made particularly challenging by the fact that disadvantage and inequality are multifaceted, notoriously difficult to measure, and reinforced by feedback loops in underlying structures.
In this talk, we develop and analyze algorithmic and computational techniques to address these issues through two types of interventions: one in the form of allocating scarce societal resources and another in the form of improving access to information. We examine the ways in which techniques from algorithms, discrete optimization, and network and computational science can combat different forms of disadvantage, including susceptibility to income shocks, disparities in access to health information, and social segregation. We discuss current policy and practice informed by this work and close with a discussion of an emerging research area -- Mechanism Design for Social Good (MD4SG) -- around the use of algorithms, optimization, and mechanism design to address this category of problems.

Bio: Rediet Abebe is a Junior Fellow at the Harvard Society of Fellows. She holds a Ph.D. in computer science from Cornell University, where she was advised by Jon Kleinberg, as well as an M.S. in applied mathematics from Harvard University, an M.A. in mathematics from the University of Cambridge, and a B.A. in mathematics from Harvard College. Her research is in the fields of algorithms and AI, with a focus on discrete algorithms, optimization, network and computational science, and their applications to equity and social good concerns. As part of this research agenda, Abebe co-founded Mechanism Design for Social Good (MD4SG), a multi-institutional, interdisciplinary initiative working to improve access to opportunity. This initiative has participants from over 100 institutions in 20 countries and has been supported by Schmidt Futures, the MacArthur Foundation, and the Institute for New Economic Thinking. Abebe's work has informed policy and practice at various organizations, including the Ethiopian Ministry of Education and the National Institutes of Health. In 2019, she served on the NIH Advisory Committee to the Director Working Group on AI, whose recommendations were unanimously approved by the General Director's advisory committee. Abebe was recently recognized by the 2019 MIT Technology Review’s 35 Innovators Under 35 award and honored as a one to watch by the 2018 Bloomberg 50 list. She has presented her research in venues such as the National Academy of Sciences, the United Nations, and the Museum of Modern Art. Her work has been covered by outlets including Forbes, the Boston Globe, and the Washington Post. In 2017 Abebe co-founded Black in AI, a non-profit organization tackling diversity and inclusion issues in the field. Her research is deeply influenced by her upbringing in her hometown of Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.